# Bayesian-Uber-Pickup

## Overview

This project analyzes Uber pickup patterns across New York City counties over time using Bayesian modeling techniques. The goals are to understand spatial, temporal, and spatial-temporal interactions and predict pickup frequencies. 

Bayesian models are developed to predict Uber pickup events at the county level, incorporating zone characteristics, spatial dependencies, and temporal dependencies. The project involves data pulling, processing, exploratory analysis, modeling, and evaluation.

The final report summarizing the project's findings is available in the file `Final Report.pdf`.

## Data
The raw data comes from two sources:
 
  * Uber pickup: latitude/longitude, date/time [(Kaggle)](https://www.kaggle.com/fivethirtyeight/uber-pickups-in-new-york-city)
  * NYC county boundaries and zone characteristics: total population, employed population, housing unit [(NHGIS)](https://data2.nhgis.org/main)

## Model
Hierarchical Bayesian models are applied. At the first level, the number of pickups ($ğ‘Œ_{ğ‘–ğ‘¡}$) follows a Poisson distribution, where ğ‘›ğ‘– is the base pickup frequency for each county and $ğ‘…_{ğ‘–ğ‘¡}$ is the pickup rates of each county ğ‘– at a ğ‘¡-th time interval.

$$
Y_{it} \sim \text{Poisson}(n_i* R_{it})
$$

At the second level, four different Bayesian models will be implemented and compared:
 * Base Model: It is designed as a log link of a combined effect of zonal characteristics predictors.

 $$
 log(R_{it}) = \alpha + \beta * X_i + \epsilon_{it}
 $$

 * Spatial Model: It adds a spatial effect term, borrowing information from its neighboring counties. The neighboring counties are defined as the counties that share boundaries. The spatial effect term ($\theta_ğ‘–$) follows a conditional autoregression distribution.

 $$
 log(R_{it}) = \alpha + \beta * X_i + \theta_i + \epsilon_{it}
 $$
 
 $$
 \theta_i \sim \text{Normal}(\mu_i,{\sigma_\theta}^2)
 $$
 
 $$
 \mu_i \sim \text{CAR}(W, {\sigma_\mu}^2)
 $$

 * Temporal Model: It adds a temporal effect term, borrowing information from its neighboring time interval. The neighboring time intervals are defined as the adjacent hour, e.g., 7 am and 8 am. The temporal effect term ($\phi_t$) follows a conditional autoregression distribution.

 $$
 log(R_{it}) = \alpha + \beta * X_i + \phi_t + \epsilon_{it}
 $$
 
 $$
 \phi_t \sim \text{Normal}(v_t,{\sigma_\phi}^2)
 $$
 
 $$
 v_t \sim \text{CAR}(U, {\sigma_v}^2)
 $$

  * Spatial-Temporal Model: It adds a spatial effect term and a temporal effect term as illustrated above.

 $$
 log(R_{it}) = \alpha + \beta * X_i + \theta_i + \phi_t + \epsilon_{it}
 $$

 $$
 \theta_i \sim \text{Normal}(\mu_i,{\sigma_\theta}^2)
 $$
 
 $$
 \mu_i \sim \text{CAR}(W, {\sigma_\mu}^2)
 $$
 
 $$
 \phi_t \sim \text{Normal}(v_t,{\sigma_\phi}^2)
 $$
 
 $$
 v_t \sim \text{CAR}(U, {\sigma_v}^2)
 $$
 
## Files
  * `GeoData-Processing.ipynb` includes data pipeline of pulling, formatting, spatial joining and aggregation. Spatial weight is generated by the arcpy function <i>Polygon Neighbors</i> and reformatted by the <i>nx </i> package.
  * `Uber_Prediction.ipynb`:  includes four Bayesian models and model evaluation.
## Output
To evaluate the overall model fit and predictive performance, Mean Absolute Deviance (MAD) and Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) are used. The spatial-temporal models performed the best by balancing model fit and complexity.
